Add SpectatorHistogram extension (#15340)
apache/druid: docs/development/extensions-contrib/spectator-histogram.md

```
{
  "type": "percentileSpectatorHistogram",
  "name": <output name>,
  "field": {
    "type": "fieldAccess",
    "fieldName": <name of aggregated SpectatorHistogram>
  },
  "percentile": <decimal percentile, e.g. 50.0 for median>
}
```

| Property   | Description                                                 | Required? |
|------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| type       | This String should always be "percentileSpectatorHistogram" | yes       |
| name       | A String for the output (result) name of the calculation.   | yes       |
| field      | A field reference pointing to the aggregated histogram.     | yes       |
| percentile | A single decimal percentile between 0.0 and 100.0           | yes       |

### Percentiles (multiple)
This returns an array of percentiles corresponding to those requested.

```
{
  "type": "percentilesSpectatorHistogram",
  "name": <output name>,
  "field": {
    "type": "fieldAccess",
    "fieldName": <name of aggregated SpectatorHistogram>
  },
  "percentiles": [25, 50, 75, 99.5]
}
```

> > Note: It's more efficient to request multiple percentiles in a single query

Author: Where only a single percentile is wanted, often median or 95th, it's slightly nicer to get a single value back, rather than having to extract from an array in the results.
Also not a strong opinion.

Is the note misleading? It's trying to say, "if you want multiple percentiles from the same underlying metric, then ask for them all at once, rather than as separate metrics". 1 query being more efficient than 2.

---

<!--
  ~ Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one
  ~ or more contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file
  ~ distributed with this work for additional information
  ~ regarding copyright ownership.  The ASF licenses this file
  ~ to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the
  ~ "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance
  ~ with the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at
  ~
  ~   http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0
  ~
  ~ Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing,
  ~ software distributed under the License is distributed on an
  ~ "AS IS" BASIS, WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY
  ~ KIND, either express or implied.  See the License for the
  ~ specific language governing permissions and limitations
  ~ under the License.
  -->

## Summary
This module provides Apache Druid approximate histogram aggregators and percentile
post-aggregators based on Spectator fixed-bucket histograms.

Consider using this extension if you need percentile approximations and:
* want fast and accurate queries
* at a lower storage cost
* and have a large dataset
* using only positive measurements

> > The main benefit of this extension over data-sketches is the reduced storage
> footprint. Which leads to smaller segment sizes, faster loading from deep storage
> and lower memory usage.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Combine this into the section above. Note that the `>` notation actually makes text smaller and italicized, which may get overlooked.

Example: https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/operations/durable-storage/ ("Note that only S3 is supported as a durable storage location.")

In the Druid instance shown below, the example Wikipedia dataset is loaded 3 times.
* As-is, no rollup applied
* With a single extra metric column of type `spectatorHistogram` ingesting the `added` column
* With a single extra metric column of type `quantilesDoublesSketch` ingesting the `added` column

Spectator histograms average just 6 extra bytes per row, while the data-sketch

> adds 48 bytes per row. This is an 8 x reduction in additional storage size.

Reviewer: Add new line before and after figures

![Comparison of datasource sizes in web console](../../assets/spectator-histogram-size-comparison.png)

> As rollup improves, so does the size saving. For example, ingesting the wikipedia data

Reviewer: Capitalize "Wikipedia" when used in text (here and elsewhere)

> As rollup improves, so does the size saving. For example, ingesting the wikipedia data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As rollup improves, so does the size savings. For example, when you ingest the Wikipedia dataset
```

Reviewer: Prefer "you" instead of "we" in docs. https://github.com/apache/druid/blob/master/docs/development/docs-contribute.md#style-checklist

> with day-grain query granularity and removing all dimensions except `countryName`,
> we get to a segment that has just 106 rows. The base segment is 87 bytes per row,
> adding a single `spectatorHistogram` column adds just 27 bytes per row on average vs
> `quantilesDoublesSketch` adding 255 bytes per row. This is a 9.4 x reduction in additional storage size.
> Storage gains will differ per dataset depending on the variance and rollup of the data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with day-grain query granularity and remove all dimensions except `countryName`,
this results in a segment that has just 106 rows. The base segment has 87 bytes per row.
Compare the following bytes per row for SpectatorHistogram versus DataSketches:
* An additional `spectatorHistogram` column adds 27 bytes per row on average.
* An additional `quantilesDoublesSketch` column adds 255 bytes per row.

SpectatorHistogram reduces the additional storage size by 9.4 times in this example.
Storage gains will differ per dataset depending on the variance and rollup of the data.
```

## Background
[Spectator](https://netflix.github.io/atlas-docs/spectator/) is a simple library
for instrumenting code to record dimensional time series data.
It was built, primarily, to work with [Atlas](https://netflix.github.io/atlas-docs/).
Atlas was developed by Netflix to manage dimensional time series data for near
real-time operational insight.

With the [Atlas-Druid](https://github.com/Netflix-Skunkworks/iep-apps/tree/main/atlas-druid)
service, it's possible to use the power of Atlas queries, backed by Druid as a
data store to benefit from high-dimensionality and high-cardinality data.

SpectatorHistogram is designed for efficient parallel aggregations while still
allowing for filtering and grouping by dimensions. 

> It provides similar functionality to the built-in data-sketch aggregator, but is

Reviewer: Refer to "DataSketch" in line with the docs (here and elsewhere)
https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/development/extensions-core/datasketches-extension/

> opinionated and optimized for typical measurements of cloud services and web-apps.

Reviewer: What does "opinionated" mean in this context?

Author: There are opinions built into the implementation, the main one being that smaller values should be more accurately recorded. The opinion that we can afford to be off by a few million once we're into the many-millions range, but don't want to be off by more than 1 at the very small numbers.
Happy to try to rephrase.

> opinionated and optimized for typical measurements of cloud services and web-apps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
opinionated and optimized for typical measurements from cloud services and web apps.
```

> Measurements such as page load time, transferred bytes, response time, request latency, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, measurements such as page load time, transferred bytes, response time, and request latency.
```

> Through some trade-offs we're able to provide a significantly more compact

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Through some trade-offs SpectatorHistogram provides a significantly more compact
```

representation with the same aggregation performance and accuracy as

> data-sketches (depending on data-set, see limitations below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data-sketches. Note that results depend on the dataset.
Also see the [limitations](#limitations] of this extension.
```

> It provides similar functionality to the built-in DataSketches `quantilesDoublesSketch` aggregator, but is
> opinionated and optimized for typical measurements from cloud services and web apps.
> For example, measurements such as page load time, transferred bytes, response time, and request latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It provides similar functionality to the built-in DataSketches `quantilesDoublesSketch` aggregator, but is
opinionated to maintain higher accuracy at smaller values.
See [Bucket boundaries](#histogram-bucket-boundaries) for more information and an example.
The SpectatorHistogram is optimized for typical measurements from cloud services and web apps,
such as measurements such as page load time, transferred bytes, response time, and request latency.

```

## Limitations

> * Supports positive long integer values within the range of [0, 2^53). Negatives are
> coerced to 0.
> * Decimals are not supported.
> * 276 fixed buckets with increasing bucket widths. In practice, the observed error of computed percentiles is in the range (0.1%, 3%). See [Bucket Boundaries](#histogram-bucket-boundaries) for the full list of bucket boundaries.
> * DruidSQL queries are yet not supported. You must use native Druid queries.
> * Vectorized queries are yet not supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Supports positive long integer values within the range of [0, 2^53). Negatives are
coerced to 0.
* Does not support decimals.
* Does not support Druid SQL queries, only native queries.
* Does not support vectorized queries.
* Generates 276 fixed buckets with increasing bucket widths. In practice, the observed error of computed percentiles ranges from 0.1% to 3%, exclusive. See [Bucket boundaries](#histogram-bucket-boundaries) for the full list of bucket boundaries.
```
Start each bullet in the same way (verb or noun)

> > If any of these limitations are a problem, then the data-sketch aggregator
> is most likely a better choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip
If these limitations don't work for your use case, then use [DataSketches](../extensions-core/datasketches-extension.md) instead.
:::
```
Uses Docusaurus-style admonitions to capture attention https://docusaurus.io/docs/2.x/markdown-features/admonitions

## Functionality

> The SpectatorHistogram aggregator is capable of generating histograms from raw numeric

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SpectatorHistogram aggregator can generate histograms from raw numeric
```
Prefer active voice

> values as well as aggregating/combining pre-aggregated histograms generated using

Reviewer: ```suggestion
values as well as aggregating or combining pre-aggregated histograms generated using
```
Use "or" or "and" instead of "/" which can be ambiguous

the SpectatorHistogram aggregator itself.
While you can generate histograms on the fly at query time, it is generally more
performant to generate histograms during ingestion and then combine them at
query time. This is especially true where rollup is enabled. It may be misleading or 

> incorrect to generate histogram from already rolled-up summed data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
incorrect to generate histograms from already rolled-up summed data.
```

The module provides postAggregators, `percentileSpectatorHistogram` (singular) and

> `percentilesSpectatorHistogram` (plural), that can be used to compute approximate 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`percentilesSpectatorHistogram` (plural), to compute approximate 
```

percentiles from histograms generated by the SpectatorHistogram aggregator.
Again, these postAggregators can be used to compute percentiles from raw numeric
values via the SpectatorHistogram aggregator or from pre-aggregated histograms.

> If you're only using the aggregator to compute percentiles from raw numeric values,
then you can use the built-in data-sketch aggregator instead. The performance

> and accuracy are comparable, the data-sketch aggregator supports negative values,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and accuracy are comparable. However, the DataSketch aggregator supports negative values,
```

> and you don't need to load an additional extension.

Reviewer: It seems DataSketches also need to be loaded. Did you mean "download"?
https://druid.apache.org/docs/latest/development/extensions-core/datasketches-extension/
```
druid.extensions.loadList=["druid-datasketches"]
```

 
An aggregated SpectatorHistogram can also be queried using a `longSum` or `doubleSum`
aggregator to retrieve the population of the histogram. This is effectively the count
of the number of values that were aggregated into the histogram. This flexibility can
avoid the need to maintain a separate metric for the count of values.

For high-frequency measurements, you may need to pre-aggregate data at the client prior
to sending into Druid. For example, if you're measuring individual image render times
on an image-heavy website, you may want to aggregate the render times for a page-view
into a single histogram prior to sending to Druid in real-time. This can reduce the
amount of data that's needed to send from the client across the wire.

SpectatorHistogram supports ingesting pre-aggregated histograms in real-time and batch.
They can be sent as a JSON map, keyed by the spectator bucket ID and the value is the
count of values. This is the same format as the serialized JSON representation of the

> histogram. The keys need not be ordered or contiguous e.g.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
histogram. The keys need not be ordered or contiguous. For example:
```

```json
{ "4":  8, "5": 15, "6": 37, "7": 9, "8": 3, "10": 1, "13": 1 }
```

## Loading the extension
To use SpectatorHistogram, make sure you [include](../../configuration/extensions.md#loading-extensions) the extension in your config file:

```
druid.extensions.loadList=["druid-spectator-histogram"]
```

## Aggregators

The result of the aggregation is a histogram that is built by ingesting numeric values from
the raw data, or from combining pre-aggregated histograms. The result is represented in 
JSON format where the keys are the bucket index and the values are the count of entries
in that bucket.

The buckets are defined as per the Spectator [PercentileBuckets](https://github.com/Netflix/spectator/blob/main/spectator-api/src/main/java/com/netflix/spectator/api/histogram/PercentileBuckets.java) specification.

> See [Appendix](#histogram-bucket-boundaries) for the full list of bucket boundaries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [Histogram bucket boundaries](#histogram-bucket-boundaries) for the full list of bucket boundaries.
```

```js
  // The set of buckets is generated by using powers of 4 and incrementing by one-third of the
  // previous power of 4 in between as long as the value is less than the next power of 4 minus
  // the delta.
  //
  // Base: 1, 2, 3
  //
  // 4 (4^1), delta = 1 (~1/3 of 4)
  //     5, 6, 7, ..., 14,
  //
  // 16 (4^2), delta = 5 (~1/3 of 16)
  //    21, 26, 31, ..., 56,
  //
  // 64 (4^3), delta = 21 (~1/3 of 64)
  // ...
```

There are multiple aggregator types included, all of which are based on the same

> underlying implementation. The different types signal to the Atlas-Druid service (if using)
> how to handle the resulting data from a query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
underlying implementation. If you use the Atlas-Druid service, the different types
signal the service on how to handle the resulting data from a query.
```

```
{
  "type": "percentileSpectatorHistogram",
  "name": <output name>,
  "field": {
    "type": "fieldAccess",
    "fieldName": <name of aggregated SpectatorHistogram>
  },
  "percentile": <decimal percentile, e.g. 50.0 for median>
}
```

| Property   | Description                                                 | Required? |
|------------|-------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| type       | This String should always be "percentileSpectatorHistogram" | yes       |
| name       | A String for the output (result) name of the calculation.   | yes       |
| field      | A field reference pointing to the aggregated histogram.     | yes       |
| percentile | A single decimal percentile between 0.0 and 100.0           | yes       |

### Percentiles (multiple)
This returns an array of percentiles corresponding to those requested.

```
{
  "type": "percentilesSpectatorHistogram",
  "name": <output name>,
  "field": {
    "type": "fieldAccess",
    "fieldName": <name of aggregated SpectatorHistogram>
  },
  "percentiles": [25, 50, 75, 99.5]
}
```

> > Note: It's more efficient to request multiple percentiles in a single query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> It's more efficient to request multiple percentiles in a single query
```

than to request individual percentiles in separate queries. This array-based
helper is provided for convenience and has a marginal performance benefit over
using the singular percentile post-aggregator multiple times within a query.
The more expensive part of the query is the aggregation of the histogram.
The post-aggregation calculations all happen on the same aggregated histogram.

> Results will contain arrays matching the length and order of the requested

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The results contain arrays matching the length and order of the requested
```

array of percentiles.

```
"percentilesAdded": [
    0.5504911679884643, // 25th percentile
    4.013975155279504,  // 50th percentile 
    78.89518317503394,  // 75th percentile
    8580.024999999994   // 99.5th percentile
]
```

| Property    | Description                                                  | Required? |
|-------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|-----------|
| type        | This String should always be "percentilesSpectatorHistogram" | yes       |
| name        | A String for the output (result) name of the calculation.    | yes       |
| field       | A field reference pointing to the aggregated histogram.      | yes       |
| percentiles | Non-empty array of decimal percentiles between 0.0 and 100.0 | yes       |

> ## Appendix

Reviewer: We don't typically include an appendix in docs. Consider making this "Examples" and promoting the heading for bucket boundaries.
```suggestion
## Examples
```

      "name": "medianAdded",
      "field": {
        "type": "fieldAccess",
        "fieldName": "histogram_added"
      },
      "percentile": "50.0"
    }
  ]
}
```
Results in
```json
[
  {
    "result": {
      "histogram_added": {
        "0": 11096, "1": 632, "2": 297, "3": 187, "4": 322, "5": 161,
        "6": 174, "7": 127, "8": 125, "9": 162, "10": 123, "11": 106,
        "12": 95, "13": 104, "14": 95, "15": 588, "16": 540, "17": 690,
        "18": 719, "19": 478, "20": 288, "21": 250, "22": 219, "23": 224,
        "24": 737, "25": 424, "26": 343, "27": 266, "28": 232, "29": 217,
        "30": 171, "31": 164, "32": 161, "33": 530, "34": 339, "35": 236,
        "36": 181, "37": 152, "38": 113, "39": 128, "40": 80, "41": 75,
        "42": 289, "43": 145, "44": 138, "45": 83, "46": 45, "47": 46,
        "48": 64, "49": 65, "50": 71, "51": 421, "52": 525, "53": 59,
        "54": 31, "55": 35, "56": 8, "57": 10, "58": 5, "59": 4, "60": 11,
        "61": 10, "62": 5, "63": 2, "64": 2, "65": 1, "67": 1, "68": 1,
        "69": 1, "70": 1, "71": 1, "78": 2
      },
      "medianAdded": 4.013975155279504
    },
    "timestamp": "2016-06-27T00:00:00.000Z"
  }
]
```

> ### Histogram Bucket Boundaries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Histogram bucket boundaries
```

> These are the upper bounds of each bucket index. There are 276 buckets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following array lists the upper bounds of each bucket index. There are 276 buckets in total.
```

The first bucket index is 0 and the last bucket index is 275.

> As you can see the bucket widths increase as the bucket index increases. This leads to a greater absolute error for larger values, but maintains a relative error of rough percentage across the number range.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The bucket widths increase as the bucket index increases. This leads to a greater absolute error for larger values, but maintains a relative error of rough percentage across the number range.
```

> i.e the maximum error at value 10 is 0 since the bucket width is 1. But for a value of 16,000,000,000 the bucket width is 1,431,655,768 giving an error of up to ~8.9%. In practice, the observed error of computed percentiles is in the range (0.1%, 3%).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, the maximum error at value 10 is zero since the bucket width is 1 (the difference of 11-10). For a value of 16,000,000,000, the bucket width is 1,431,655,768 giving an error of up to ~8.9%. In practice, the observed error of computed percentiles is in the range of (0.1%, 3%).
```
Not sure if it's 11-10 or 10-9. Also it's not clear how you get 8.9%. Consider explaining in more detail, or linking to relevant docs.
